# Types of Scalability
To scale well, an application needs solid computing power. The servers should be powerful enough to handle increased traffic loads.

There are two ways to scale an application:

1.  Vertical scaling
2.  Horizontal scaling

<br>

## What is vertical scaling?

- Vertical scaling means adding more power to your server. Let’s say your app is hosted by a server with 16 gigs of RAM. To handle the increased load you increase the RAM to 32 gigs. Here, you have vertically scaled the server.

- Ideally, when the traffic starts to build on your app the first step should be to scale vertically. Vertical scaling is also called _scaling up_.

- In this type of scaling we increase the power of the hardware running the app. This is the simplest way to scale because it doesn’t require any code refactoring or making any complex configurations and stuff. I’ll discuss further down the lesson, why code refactoring is required when we horizontally scale the app.

- However, there is only so much we can do when scaling vertically. There is a limit to the capacity we can augment for a single server.

- A good analogy would be to think of a multi-story building. We can keep adding floors to it but only up to a certain point. What if the number of people in need of a flat keeps rising? We can’t scale the building up to the moon for obvious reasons.

- Now is the time to build more buildings. This is where _horizontal scalability_ comes in.

- When the traffic is too great to be handled by single hardware, we bring in more servers to work together.

---

## What is horizontal scaling?

- Horizontal scaling, also known as _scaling out_, means adding more hardware to the existing hardware resource pool. This increases the computational power of the system as a whole.

- Now the increased traffic influx can be easily dealt with the increased computational capacity and there is literally no limit to how much we can scale horizontally assuming we have infinite resources. We can keep adding servers after servers, setting up data centers after data centers.

- Horizontal scaling also provides us with the ability to dynamically scale in real-time as the traffic on our website increases and decreases over a period of time as opposed to vertical scaling which requires pre-planning and a stipulated time to be pulled off.

- ---

 ## Cloud elasticity

- The biggest reason why _cloud computing_ become so popular in the industry is the ability to scale up and down dynamically. The ability to use and pay only for the resources required by the website became a trend for obvious reasons.

- If the site has a heavy traffic influx more server nodes get added and when it doesn’t, the dynamically added nodes are removed.

- This approach is known as cloud elasticity and saves businesses lots of money every single day. It indicates the stretching and returning to the original infrastructural computational capacity.

- Having multiple server nodes on the backend also helps the website staying alive online all the time even if a few server nodes crash. This is known as _high availability_.

---