## What is high availability?

> High availability, also known as _HA_, is the ability of the system to stay online despite having failures at the infrastructural level in real-time.

- High availability ensures the uptime of the service much more than the normal time. It improves the reliability of the system and ensures minimum downtime.

- The sole mission of highly available systems is to stay online and stay connected. A very basic example of this is having back-up generators to ensure continuous power supply in case of any power outages.

- In the industry, HA is often expressed as a percentage. For instance, when the system is _99.99999%_ highly available, it simply means _99.99999%_ of the total hosting time the service will be up. You might often see this in the Service Level Agreements (SLA) of cloud platforms.

---

## How important is high availability to online services?

- Social applications going down for a bit and then bouncing back might not impact businesses that much. However, there are mission-critical systems like aircraft systems, spacecrafts, mining machines, hospital servers, and finance stock-market systems that cannot afford to go down at any time. After all, lives depend on it.

- The smooth functioning of the mission-critical systems relies on continual connectivity with their network/servers. These are the instances that do not work without super highly available infrastructures.

- Besides, no service likes to go down, critical or not.

- To meet the high availability requirements, systems are designed to be _fault-tolerant_ and their components are made _redundant_

---