# Load Balancing Methods
There are primarily three modes of load balancing:

1.  _DNS Load Balancing_
2.  _Hardware-based Load Balancing_
3.  _Software-based Load Balancing_

---

## DNS Load Balancing

- When a large-scale service such as _[amazon.com](http://amazon.com/)_ runs, it needs way more than a single machine to run its services. A service as big as _[amazon.com](http://amazon.com/)_ is deployed across multiple data centers in different geographical locations across the globe.

- To spread the user traffic across different clusters in different data centers. There are different ways to set up load balancing. In this lesson, we will discuss _DNS load balancing_, which is set up at the _DNS_ level on the _authoritative server_.

- _DNS load balancing_ enables the _authoritative server_ to return different _IP addresses_ of a certain domain to the clients. Every time it receives a query for an _IP_, it returns a list of _IP addresses_ of a domain to the client.

- With every request, the _authoritative server_ changes the order of the _IP addresses_ in the list in a _round-robin_ fashion.

- As the client receives the list, it sends out a request to the first _IP address_ on the list to fetch the data from the website. The reason for returning a list of _IP addresses_ to the client is to enable it to use other _IP addresses_ in the list in case the first doesn’t return a response within a stipulated time.

- When another client sends out a request for an _IP address_ to the _authoritative server_, it re-orders the list and puts another _IP address_ at the top of the list following the _round-robin algorithm_.

- Also, when the client hits an _IP_, it may not necessarily hit an application server. Instead, it may hit another load balancer implemented at the data center level that manages the clusters of application servers.

---

## Limitations of DNS load balancing

- _DNS load balancing_ is largely used by companies to distribute traffic across multiple data centers that the application runs in. However, this approach has several limitations. For instance, it does not take into account the existing load on the servers, the content they hold, their request processing time, their _in-service_ status, and so on.

- Also, since these _IP addresses_ are cached by the client’s machine and the _DNS Resolver_, there is always a possibility of a request being routed to a machine that is out of service.

- _DNS load balancing_ despite its limitations, is preferred by companies because it is an easy and less expensive way of setting up load balancing on their services.

---

## Hardware load balancers

- _Hardware load balancers_ are highly performant physical hardware. They sit in front of the application servers and distribute the load based on the number of existing open connections to a server, compute utilization, and several other parameters.

- Since these load balancers are physical hardware they need maintenance and regular updates, just like any other server hardware would need. They are expensive to set up in comparison to _software load balancers_, and their upkeep may require a certain skill set.

- If the business has an _IT team_ and _network specialists_ in house, they can take care of these load balancers. Otherwise, the developers are expected to wrap their heads around how to set up these hardware load balancers with some assistance from vendors. This is why developers prefer working with software load balancers.

- When using _hardware load balancers_, we may also have to overprovision them to deal with the peak traffic, which is not the case with _software load balancers_.

- _Hardware load balancers_ are primarily picked because of their top-notch performance.


---

## Software load balancers

- _Software load balancers_ can be installed on commodity hardware and _VMs_. They are more cost-effective and offer more flexibility to the developers. _Software load balancers_ can be upgraded and provisioned easily compared to _hardware load balancers_.

- You will also find several _Load Balancers as a Service (LBaaS)_ services online that enable you to directly plug in load balancers into your application without you having to do any sort of setup.

- _Software load balancers_ are pretty advanced compared to _DNS load balancing_ as they consider many parameters such as _content hosted by the servers, cookies, HTTP headers, CPU and memory utilization, load on the network_, and so on to route traffic across the servers.

- They also continually perform health checks on the servers to keep an updated list of _in-service_ machines.

- Development teams prefer to work with _software load balancers_ as _hardware load balancers_ require specialists to manage them.

- [HAProxy](https://www.haproxy.com/) is one example of a _software load balancer_ that is used widely by the big guns in the industry to scale their systems, including _GitHub, Reddit, Instagram, AWS, Tumblr, StackOverflow_, and many more.

- Besides the _Round Robin algorithm_ which _DNS Load balancers_ use, _software load balancers_ leverage several other algorithms to efficiently route traffic across the machines. Let’s take a look.

---