## Pros of microservice architecture

#### No Single Points of failure

- Since microservices is a loosely coupled architecture, there is no single point of failure. Therefore, even if a few of the services go down, the application as a whole is still up.

#### Leverage the heterogeneous technologies

- Every component interacts with each other via a _REST API Gateway interface_. The components can leverage the polyglot persistence architecture and other heterogeneous technologies together like _Java_, _Python_, _Ruby_, _NodeJS_, etc.

- _Polyglot persistence_ uses multiple database types, like _SQL_ and _NoSQL_ together in an architecture.

#### Independent and continuous deployments

- The deployments can be independent and continuous. We can have dedicated teams for every microservice, and it can be scaled independently without impacting other services.

---

## Cons of microservices architecture
#### Complexities in management

- Microservices is a distributed environment where there are so many nodes running together. As a result, managing and monitoring them gets complex.

- We need to set up additional components to manage microservices such as a node manager like _Apache Zookeeper_, which is a _distributed tracing_ service for monitoring the nodes etc.

- We need more skilled resources and maybe a dedicated team to manage these services.

#### No strong consistency
- _Strong consistency_ is hard to guarantee in a distributed environment. Things are _eventually consistent_ across the nodes, and this limitation is due to the distributed design.

---

## When should you pick a microservices architecture?

- The microservice architecture fits best for complex use cases and for apps that expect traffic to increase exponentially in the future, like a fancy social network application.

- A typical social networking application has various components such as messaging, real-time chat, LIVE video streaming, image uploads, Like and Share features, etc.

- In this scenario, I would suggest developing each component separately, keeping the _Single Responsibility_ and the _Separation of Concerns_ principles in mind.

- Writing every feature in a single codebase would take no time to become a mess.

---