## Client-side rendering - How does a browser render a web page?

- When a user requests a web page from the server and the browser receives the response, it has to render the response on the window in the form of an HTML page.

- For this, the browser has several components, such as the:
	-   _Browser engine_
	-   _Rendering engine_
	-   _JavaScript interpreter_
	-   _Networking and the UI backend_
	-   _Data storage_ etc.
	
<br>

- I won’t go into much detail but the browser has to do a lot of work to convert the response from the server into an HTML page.

- The rendering engine constructs the _DOM_ tree and renders and paints the construction. Naturally, all this activity needs a bit of time.

---
## Server-side rendering

- To avoid all this rendering time on the client, developers often render the UI on the server, generate HTML there and directly send the HTML page to the UI.

- This technique is known as the _server-side rendering_. It ensures faster rendering of the UI, averting the UI loading time in the browser window because the page is already created and the browser doesn’t have to do much assembling or rendering work.

---

## Use cases for server-side & client-side rendering

- The server-side rendering approach is perfect for delivering static content, such as WordPress blogs. It’s also good for SEO because the crawlers can easily read the generated content.

- However, modern websites are highly dependent on AJAX. On such websites, content for a particular module or a section of a page has to be fetched and rendered on the fly.

- Therefore, server-side rendering doesn’t help much. For every AJAX-request, instead of sending just the required content to the client, the approach generates the entire page on the server. This process consumes unnecessary bandwidth and also fails to provide a smooth user experience.

- A big downside to this is that, once the number of concurrent users on the website rises, it puts an unnecessary load on the server.

- _Client-side rendering_ works best for modern dynamic AJAX-based websites.

- However, we can leverage a hybrid approach, to get the most out of both techniques. We can use server-side rendering for the home page and for the other static content on our website and use client-side rendering for the dynamic pages.


---