# Contents

1. [[Application Layer]]
2. [[Transport Layer]]
3. [[Understanding Server Throughput Limits]] - **IMP**
4. [[CAP Theorem]]
5. [[Monolith vs Microservice]]
6. Microservices Patterns
	1. [[Decomposition Pattern]]
	2. [[SAGA Pattern]]
	3. [[CQRS Pattern]]
	4. Strangler pattern?
7. [[HLD/Consistent Hashing|Consistent Hashing]]
8. [[URL Shortener]] - Not convinced, come back to this
9. [[Back Of the Envelope]]
10. [[SQL vs NoSQL]]
11. [[Sharding]]
12.  [[Design Chat Application]]
13. [[Idempotency]]
14. [[Design High Availability System]]
15. [[Message Queues in Distributed Systems]]
16. [[Proxy Server]]
17. [[Load Balancer Algorithms]]
18. [[Distributed Caching Strategies]]
19. [[Cache Eviction]]
20. [[2 Phase Commit]]
21. [[Database Indexing]]
22. [[Concurrency Control]]
23. [[2 Phase Locking]]
24. [[API Gateway]]
25. [[Service Mesh]]
26. [[DNS]]
27. [[Dual Write Problem]]
28. [[Java HashMap Internals]]
29. [[Design Key Value Store]] - Dynamo DB
30. [[Redis]]

## Backlog

- Rate Limiter - Video
- OAuth 2.0 + Encryption + JWT
- Elastic Search
- When a user types in the web domain on a browser, what are the chain of events that take place?
	- is there a common DNS responsible to identify the ip address? the chain of thought here is to identify if there is any potential single point of failure and what are the redundancies in place to mitigate them? starting from a client typying the webdomain till it receives a response
	- the point is that every machine will have some max limit, what do we do in case this is breached
	- like dns also can get overloaded right? then will it become a bottleneck?
- Load Balancer Questions 
- Sharding
- CDNs
- Concurrency Theory - Different locking mechanisms



---

To do:
- Scale 0 to Million
	- Single server
	- application and db server replication
	- load balancer + multiple app servers
	- Database Replication
	- Cache
	- CDN
	- Data Centre
	- Messaging Queue
	- Database Scaling
		- Horizontal/veritical
		- sharding
